Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
After writing nearly a hundred short stories, O'Donnell moved on to writing novels, and
so far he's written six.
These include Bandersnatch, Mayflies, War of Emission, and the Journeys of McGill Fian
series, Caverns, Rees, and Lava.
O'Donnell spent a good deal of time in Korea before and after college, and he majored in
Chinese Studies at college.
We asked him if having lived in the Orient influences his writing.
Mayflies is O'Donnell's second novel.
It's the story of a generation ship conveying thousands of settlers to a far destination.
But the focus is on the computer that guides the ship.
You see its core is a living human brain that has retained the memories of the time it was
in the body of Dr. Gerard Medeclura.
O'Donnell explains the genesis of this concept.
Mayflies started all this, actually it was a workshop exercise.
I was at the time in a workshop here in New Haven, and we had to do, oh I forget, a two-paragraph
description of someone.
And I described this character, Medeclura, who took more than the two paragraphs to describe
the character.
And I began on for about a page, and all of a sudden he died.
And I took it into the workshop, and people said, well yes, those are nice paragraphs
and very good description, but boy what have you done here?
You've created a character and then killed him.
What a waste.
I got angry and said, well, you know, maybe I killed him, but it's not a waste.
But I can make something of him.
And they said, we dare you.
And pretty soon Mayflies was underway with me trying to prove you could write a book about
a protagonist who died on page one.
And have that protagonist a very vital part of the entire story, rather than just a haunting
memory.
The only way to do that was of course to somehow keep him alive and one thing led to another.
And the next thing I knew, Medeclura was a central computer on the Good Shit Night
Flower.
On our next show we'll talk more with Kevin O'Donnell Jr.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Anne.
Bandersnatch, Science Fiction author Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s first novel, made his paperback
appearance in 1979.
The first half of Bandersnatch depicts a 22nd century America deeply divided between the
haves and the have-nots.
A burgeoning bureaucracy strangles the have-nots.
In five of O'Donnell's novels, the protagonist must contend with stultifying bureaucracies.
When we ask O'Donnell if this represents a personal view, this is what he told us.
It achieves a goal beyond its stated purpose, or it acquires a new goal.
And that goal is to survive, to perpetuate itself, to expand, to get fat and strong and
secure.
It goes all the way back to Parkinson's Law, and the work expands until the time available
and when it has, you hire two assistants.
I think this is an inevitable trend in any bureaucracy, whether it's Western-style capitalism
or Maoist communism.
One of Mao's big campaigns was against bureaucracy.
He was constantly railing against the way that no matter what he said, no matter what he did,
the bureaucracy kept growing.
It kept issuing new regulations and new rules, and here he was, the most powerful man in China,
and he couldn't affect bureaucracy.
So yeah, that's a very personal sort of point.
A primitive planet is a setting for the second half of Bandersnatch.
In a climactic struggle, the protagonist, also known as Bandersnatch, kills a monstrous,
bear-like alien which has attacked him.
Then he discovers the alien has a young cub which for some reason befriends him and becomes
his sidekick.
Well, Donald told us that the appearance and character of the cub were unplanned,
had just sprang into being.
A baby bear actually came about almost entirely by accident.
I had had, you know, Bandersnatch wandering through this alien jungle.
And I realized he needed like a...
The way the story was going, he had to have this climactic battle sequence with a natural
force, some sort of wild animal.
And I hadn't had any wild animals, and they're really big enough for him.
All of a sudden, off the page came this monstrous, bear-like animal that almost loomed up before him
and started attacking him.
And, well, he won.
And there I was with a dead bear on the ground.
And just sort of somehow my fingers kept going and there was a sound from the distance
and it was the cub.
And the next thing I knew, he had a sidekick as you put it.
That was just accidental, really.
Sidekicks are common in science fiction and fantasy.
Here are Donald comments on the role of a sidekick.
I think it helps when the protagonist has a sidekick of some sort.
When you're writing science fiction, well, you know, why not give the hero an alien sidekick,
Sam and the McGill fiend series?
I think it lets you do a little exploring into alien psychology,
and at the same time, it lets you keep making sort of mirror-like observations of human culture.
More with Kevin O'Donnell Jr. on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Kevin O'Donnell Jr. science fiction novel War of Omissions, published in 1982.
In the book, O'Donnell describes a violent revolution which takes place in late 20th century America.
This revolution begins in the northeast.
O'Donnell presents the thoughts and actions of the participants on both sides of the revolution.
We asked him what he was trying to get across in War of Omission.
The modern-day recapitulation of the statements of power corrupt,
and absolute power corrupt, absolutely.
I was trying to say, hey, it's real easy to say that the system stinks and we'll wipe it out.
But what happens when you do wipe it out?
You know, I think this is where every revolutionary since, you know, the French in 1787 is screwed up thoroughly.
They say, well, you know, the present system is corrupt and it's bloated and it stinks and let's throw it out and we'll have paradise.
I think that's stupid.
I'm not a defender of the system.
But I think the sort of sweeping, burn it down just doesn't work because, you know, you wind up building on rubble.
You don't move into a structure that you can clean up and straighten out.
You've got ashes.
And I think really those two things were what the book was all about.
The science-fictional element in War of Omission is the Tissere, a weapon the revolutionaries perfect
which wipes out all objects in the target area instantaneously.
It makes these objects disappear.
Right, but it does something else as well.
It wipes out the memory of the target area from everyone's minds.
So if a person's house and family were deleted by a Tissere, neither he nor anyone else would have any memory of them.
Most of the action, especially Tissere deletions, takes place in New Haven, the city where O'Donnell now lives.
We asked O'Donnell if he enjoyed writing scenes in which New Haven gets destroyed.
That generated an interesting sidelight.
I was sort of offended by my publisher that they cut some references in there.
We have a building here in town.
It's the Knights of Columbus building and I think it's possibly the ugliest structure ever erected anywhere in America.
It's a huge, towering, ugly brick building with massive turrets at each of the four corners of the building.
It looks like it was designed to hold off an attack by mad and archers.
I took great pleasure in destroying that in the book.
Having it totally obliterated from the face of the earth.
At one point I had a character bring it back and change his mind. It was so ugly.
But the editor cut it right out.
No, sorry, I can't do that.
But it was fun taking out the rest in New Haven.
The concept of the Tissere is the heart of War of Omission.
Donal told us he put a lot of effort to make the Tissere believable.
The hardest part was trying to make it plausible.
A reviewer who has appeared that has really faulted the book on those grounds.
For whatever reason that person did not believe the Tissere.
I put so much effort into trying to make it believable.
I think I put more effort into that than any other part of the book.
Trying to make it seem very natural.
And trying to provide possible explanations for why this happened.
Sort of brief meditations on the nature of reality.
For those who accepted the explanation, who believed the Tissere, I think the book worked.
And I think if you can't believe that the book just falls flat.
The Tissere is believable and War of Omission works.
We'll look at Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s Journeys of McGill Fee and Series on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Science Fiction author Kevin O'Donnell Jr. has written many short stories plus six novels today.
Three of his novels form a series.
The series is called The Journeys of McGill Fee and the three installments are subtitled Caverns, Reefs and Lava.
McGill Fee is a 21st century earthling who at age four days is swallowed by a mysterious, giant, amoebillite gastropod,
which was sent by the even more mysterious far being Rhett's Glorin.
The infant McGill remains in the gastropod precisely 71 hours and 24 minutes.
Then he is discharged and the gastropod leaves the earth with no comment.
McGill seems to be a normal lad.
At age five, however, it is discovered that he has the flinger talent, the extremely rare ability to transmit people or objects
instantaneously to distant destinations in the galaxy, providing the total mass of any load doesn't exceed 918 kilograms.
Young McGill is enrolled in the Flinger Academy where he masters the art under the tutelage of experienced flingers.
Then at age 17 he is certified as a flinger.
But since McGill has puzzled about the motive of the far being for having the gastropod swallow him for three days,
he vows to seek out the far being and ask him why.
Another group is interested in McGill too, the organization.
They reason that if the far being has something in store for McGill, then they want it too.
The stage is set.
Young McGill is mastering flinging while simultaneously learning about such things in life as romance,
trying to live with the flinger bureaucracy and searching for the far being.
All the while the sinister organization is after him.
The series is obviously humorous, but it's serious as well.
Hero Donald comments on his intention for the series.
Well, my primary intent in the McGill fan series is to do something in life, fast-paced, adventuresome,
that nonetheless shows a person of incredible talent growing up and the problems he faces.
That aspect of attempts to take lower priority and the adventures of McGill being come first.
I do want a book that people can sit down and read quickly and really enjoy.
It's not a gloomy book.
The Andrew Snatch and War of Omission are sort of downbeat books.
Nape Lines is in a way upbeat, but it's got a lot of depressing stuff in it.
Whereas McGill's fan is not.
I do it partly to change the pace, to write a book that just moves right along with the art of finish.
There's a lot of things happening.
He has a very clear-cut hero who isn't unless human, has his problems.
In the first book, Caverns, McGill takes charge of a ron-gon egg which hatches in book two, Reefs.
He names the young reptilian ron-gon Sam, and Sam becomes McGill's sidekick.
Hero Donald comments on Sam's role.
Of course Sam, he's going to grow up so mixed up.
Because he's being raised entirely on earth, well except for their excursions off-world.
But he's being raised by a human being with very human values. But Sam is not human.
When he gets to his tips to maturity, he's going to be, oh heavens, from the tip of his nose to the tip of his tail, he's going to be about 15 feet long.
And he can stand about, oh, what, four and a half feet high at the shoulder?
There's the back part of him, and his head will be pretty much about six feet off the ground.
I mean, he's going to be big. He's going to be very alien-looking.
And he's going to have a lot of trouble because he's neither one nor the other.
He's not a ron-gon. He knows nothing of ron-gon culture.
But he's not, and can never be a human being.
I see lots of interesting problems ahead for Sam.
More on Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s The Journeys of McGill Fee and Next Time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thanks for watching!
Coming up next is The Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us!
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Kevin O'Donnell Jr.'s Science Fiction Series, The Journeys of McGill Fee and His Highly Popular Adventure Yarn, Featuring the Young Flinger McGill Fee and,
Who, after having developed his talent, is searching for the far-being.
Not only must young Fee and Cope with his talent and life in general, he must avoid being captured by the organization.
The series is humorous, but interspersed among the action and humor are the violent deaths of many of McGill's allies and friends, including his parents, his lovers, and his roommates.
We asked O'Donnell why he so freely dispatches with most of McGill's acquaintances.
Part of that is cold calculation on my part.
That when you're writing a series, one of the real difficulties is convincing the reader that your hero is in danger.
When you write one book, there's no problem, because the reader doesn't know how it's going to come out.
But when you have a series, the reader says, well, hey, look, you know, he's been through 18 of these adventures now, and he's emerged on the gauge from everyone, so why worry?
And, you know, the reader's emotional involvement in the story is lessened.
But when it is a real danger, when people near and dear to them are dying, and in some cases dying horribly, it brings the threat much closer,
and it makes it much more plausible.
And at this point, McGill has lost a lot of people who are very close to him.
His parents, Nadia, and Braestine, he's going to lose more.
You know, as I say, part of it is cold calculation, but part of it is also realistic appraisal of the situation being him.
He's got this talent, he's got this mysterious link with this even more mysterious alien being, and he has people hot on his trail.
And it brings, you know, reader's credibility to have not only him, but all his friends coming to you safe and sound every time.
You know, the organization, they may not be perfect, but they're not total amateurs, and they're going to be striking real close to home.
And they have so far in the first three books, and they'll continue to.
McGill encounters several types of aliens on his journeys.
We ask O'Donnell for what purpose does he use alien characters in the series?
In the series, I'm trying to make aliens who are comprehensible.
And yet who are not human.
I really think when we run into alien species, and sooner or later we will, they will have traits which we recognize as traits that we have.
In lava, I've got these religious fanatics running around.
I suspect that any sentient race we encounter will, at least in one stage of their development, have gone through an intensely religious period.
But like still be religious today, if you can tell, but I think any sentient being has to wonder on its origin, how it came to be, why it came to be, who created the universe.
So, you know, I'm trying to, not to mirror humanity, but to suggest that there are alternates with which we can have traits, attitudes in Donnell.
So far, O'Donnell has written three books in the McGill-Phean series. Here's what O'Donnell said when we asked him if there would be any more in the series.
Yes, definitely. At the moment is a McGill story, and from his childhood just been published in Berkeley Showcase.
There will be more being books.
At the moment, I'm saying seven more in the series will end soon. I'm glad to at least attend.
Kevin O'Donnell Jr. will keep us entertained with the adventures of McGill-Phean for at least a while longer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.